
# Education and British Rule.
## Notes

# Introduction

Bit by bit, the British began conquering territories in India, and making use
of the goods present in these territories. They, however, had another mission:
To educate the uncivilised Indians. 

They thought that the natives were uncivilised and that it was their goal to
educate the Indians.

# Education in pre-British times

* The education before the British was very flexible.

* There were _madrassas_ and _patshaalas_ in which a few students went to a
  teacher to learn.

* There were no prescribed textbooks. The teacher taught the students what
  deemed best for his students.

* There was no curriculum. Teaching was imparted orally.

* Sanskrit, Persian and Mathematics were the three main subjects.
  
  Question: Why was Persian and Sankrit considered as important subjects?
  
  Answer: Pesian because the mughals had previously conquered India, and
  Sanskrit because it was the ancient language of India.

* Science and Geography were not taught.

* There was no system of examinations.

* The teachers had a lot of freedom.

# The Orientalists.

* A linguist named __Sir William Jones__ arrived at Calcutta in 1783.

* During his stay in Calcutta, he developed his interest for ancient Indian
  texts. He studied a lot of sanskrit texts, and translated many of them. 
  This, he believed, would serve for two reasons:

	* It would help the British to know more about the Indian culture.

	* It would help the Indians rediscover their lost heritage.

* William Jones set up the __Asiatic Society of Bengal__ in 1784. He argued
  that Indian learning should be implemented in India.

* He wanted the government to set up institutions were ancient texts could be
  taught. He also said that persian and sanskrit should be implemented as the
  medium of instructions.

* The governor general at this time was __Warren Hastings__. He was a
  supporter of the Orientalist view. He helped set up a Madraasa in Calcutta
  to promote the study of Islamic Law.

* __Jonathan Duncan__ set up the __Benaras Sanskrit College__ at Benaras in
  1792.


# The Anglists.

Many Britishers did not support the Orientalist view of learning. They
believed that Indian learning was unscientific and often supported
superstitions.

* __James Mill__ told that, in order for education to be useful, it needed to
  be practical. His views were supported by __Thomas Macaulay__, who believed
  tht oriental learning was completely inferior to European learning. 
  
* The Anglists felt that Indians should be imparted western learning.

* Hence, western learning through the medium of english was the bes option
  left for the country.


# Promotion of education

The __English Education Act__ stated that the money alloted for education
would be spent on promoting western education to Indian through the medium of
english. The government therefore, stopped supporting Orientalists' views.


# Wood's Despatch - 1854

* In 1854, the British sent an educational despatch to India. It was known as
  the __Wood's Despatch__.

* Wood's Despatch emphasized the values and benefits of western learning:
	
	* Western learning would help the Indians to understand expanding trade
	  and commerce.

	* It would introduce Indians to the western way of life and may create a
	  demand for British goods.
	
	* Western learning would teach the skills among Indians that are used for
	  administrations. Thus it would also guarentee that an endless supply of
	  people as labourers. 
	  
	* This, in turn, would be benefitable for the company, 
	  as of the British people would charge high wages for working in India. 
	  Also, since the Indians were dependant pn the British for their job, they would be loyal to the British.

* Wood's despatch set forth a comprehensive scheme for promoting education in
  India.
	
	* It made provisions for spreading eduction. Schools, colleges and
	  universities were to be set up. In the schools, the lower levels would
	  be vernaculars, and the upper levels would be English.
	
	* In 1857, colleges were set up in many parts of India, like Calcutta,
	  Bombay and Madras.

	* Education departments were to be set up in all the provinces. They were
	  to govern the education and finanicial aid to the institutions of the
	  province.

	* Teacher recuirment and training industries were to be set up all over
	  the country.


# Flaws in education under the British.

There were several major flaws in the education under the British.

* Mass education was often neglected.

* The British taught only to the upper class and middle class people. They
  believed that, by teaching a few Indians, they were actually paving way for
  the education of the masses - They expected that the educated Indians would
  teach the uneducated ones.

* This process was called the 'downward filtration theory' because, the
  education filtered fro the top to the bottom. This practice, however, was
  not strictly followed.

* Education of girls were neglected. This came to a situation where, out of 100
  girls, only 2 knew how to read and write.

* Scientific and technical education was virtually non-existent.


# Reformers as Educators.

Many reformers were keen in educating the Indians. They believed that without
a education, it would be impossible to bring reforms in the society.

## Aligarh

__Sir Syed Ahmed Khan__ felt the need for mordern education for the muslims.
He set up institutions in which scientific works were translated into Urdu.
His greatest achievement was the setting up of the __Mohameddan Anglo-Oriental
College__ in Aligarh. It imparted scientific works and humanities education in
English. Students from all over the country came here to study. The college is
now named the __Aligarh Muslim University__(AMU).


## Baroda

In the pricely state of Baroda, __Maharaja Sayajirao__ took the lead for
imparting education. He set up many schools and colleges, and provided funds
for their functioning. The __Maharaja Sayajirao Unversity__ is also set up
here.


# National Education

Many enlightened Indians also played a major role in the spread of education.
They urged the government to spend more on eduation. Some national leaders
protested for a education that would be more different from that of the
British. Two Indians who were attached in promoting 'Indian' Education was
__Gandhiji__ and __Rabindranath Tagore.__

## Gandhiji

Gandhiji was totally against western education. He argued that such an
education was not rooted completely in India. He wanted a education that would
help the Indians to take pride in their past. 

He also argued that practical education was more sensible than reading from
books. He wanted all students to learn a craft, so that they would become
self-suffient, and develop a sense of dignity for labour.

This, he believed, would lead to the development of the body, mind and soul.
This was the essence of Gandhiji's __Nai Talim__(New Education).


## Rabindranath Tagore.

Rabindranath Tagore established the __Visva Bharathi University__ at
Shantiniketan. His wish was to combine the elements of bothe western and
Indian education, so that the students could get the benefits of both.


# Growth of Science

Many Indians believed that the neglect towards science was the main cause of
bacwardness of India. They pushed for setting up Departments of Science in
colleges, universities and institutions. Some of them set up scientific
societies to popular science.


